Mofo child manuscript

## Methods
Participants
Thirty-seven children, (21 male; mean age: 6.4 years) between four and nine years of age participated in the study. The sample consisted of children drawn from a database of families in Centre County, Pennsylvania. Fifteen additional children were tested but excluded because of equipment failure (5), experimenter error (1), poor participant vision -strabismus (1), refusal to wear net (3), too many channels above threshold (3) and too few blocks collected (2). Children were excluded if they were born prematurely, had a history of serious visual or medical problems, epilepsy, or seizures. All children tested had normal pattern vision as evaluated with HOTV opotype acuity, a measure of visual function designed for very young participants, at a distance of 10 feet. We obtained written consent to participate from parents or guardians on behalf of the children and written assent from the children themselves under procedures approved by the Institutional Review Board of The Pennsylvania State University (#37946). The research was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki.

2.1.1. Participants
Two groups of 20 adults (10 female in each group; mean age: 21.15years) participated in this experiment. Subjects were recruited from an undergraduate subject pool for research credit, or were research assistants who volunteered to participate. All subjects had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, as determined by a brief evaluation of binocular Snellen optotype acuity.


2.1.2. Display
Subjects viewed random dot kinematogram displays on a mono- chrome monitor with an 800 􏰀 600 pixel resolution and a screen refresh rate of 72 Hz. The displays were generated on a Macintosh G4 computer using Power Diva software (version 3.4, Smith- Kettlewell Eye Research Institute). Subjects viewed 2659 white dots (7 arcmin; luminance 72 cd/m2) moving against a black back- ground (0.6 cd/m2). At the viewing distance of 60 cm, the display subtended 24° 􏰀 24° visual angle. Dot positions were updated at 24 Hz.
Fig. 1 shows a schematic depiction of the displays used in the experiment. Displays featured dot motion modulating from 100% coherent global motion (indicating dot motion along a mean direction with a range of 0°) to 0% coherent motion (indicating dot motion along the same mean direction, but with a direction range of 360° for each dot) at a fixed temporal frequency of 1.2 Hz, referred to as the fundamental frequency, or F1. A full 100% coherent/incoherent display cycle took 833 ms.
All subjects viewed three optic flow pattern types (radial, rotation, and left/right linear translation) at three different speed settings. Thus, each subject viewed a total of nine conditions, with ten trials recorded per condition (yielding a total of 90 trials per subject session). Separate groups of participants viewed one of two ranges of dot speed settings. Speed Group 1 viewed displays with 5, 10, and 20arcmin displacements per dot update. At the dot update rate of 24 Hz, this yielded dot speeds of 2, 4, and 8 deg/s, respectively. Speed Group 2 viewed displays with 2.5 arcmin/update (1 deg/s), 10 arcmin/update (4 deg/s), and 40 arcmin/update (16 deg/s) speeds.
Displays were presented within an annular area 24° in outer diameter and 4.77° in inner diameter. This was meant to reduce the effect of speed differentials that occur in the fovea of the rota- tion condition due to the constant linear (not rotational) speed constraint. The annular mask also reduced the luminance anisot- ropy associated with dot density variations in the radial condition when dots expand away from or contract toward the center. A small hole cut into the inner mask permitted participants to see a fixation cross.

Stimuli
Participants viewed limited lifetime random-dot kinematograms generated by a Macintosh G4 computer using PowerDiva Video software (version 3.4, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute) connected to a monochrome Mitsubishi Std Diamondtron 2060u monitor with an 800 x 600 pixel resolution and a refresh rate of 72 Hz. All patterns were displayed in an annular region 24° in outer and 4.8° inner diameter at the 60 cm viewing distance. The display consisted of white (79.4 cd/m2) dots on a black (6 cd/m2) background. Dots were 7 arc min (.12°) in diameter and plotted at a density of 7.35 dot/deg2. The displays alternated between globally coherent (100% coherent) and globally incoherent (0% coherent) motion every 417 ms. A complete on/off cycle lasted 833 ms, for a fundamental frequency (1F1) of 1.2 Hz (See Fig. 1). The frame rate for updating dot positions was 24 Hz (1F2); dot positions were updated every 3 screen refresh cycles. During incoherent motion, the range of possible dot directions on each update cycle was 360°. During coherent motion dot directions on each update were specified by the type of global motion pattern condition. Three types of global motion patterns were displayed -- left (counterclockwise) and right (clockwise) rotation, left and right translation, and radial expansion and contraction. In order to reduce response adaptation, the direction of motion reversed every other cycle (at 0.6 Hz). Each pattern was shown at three speeds: 2, 4, and 8 deg/s, forming a total of nine conditions. Dot speeds in both the incoherent and coherent phases within a motion speed condition were identical. Each trial consisted of 10 cycles of coherent/incoherent motion. Four to 10 trials per condition were collected contingent on participant comfort and compliance in a single laboratory testing session. The maximum dot lifetime was 100 dot updates (4.17s); 1% of the dots were repositioned on each update on a fixed schedule. The relatively long dot maximum lifetime was used to reduce low frequency luminance artifacts that can result from more frequent dot repositioning.


Procedures
Upon arrival at the laboratory, study and visit procedures were described and informed consent/assent was obtained. After net fitting and placement, participants were escorted to the testing room and seated on an adjustable chair in front of the computer monitor. Electrode impedances were checked, and once impedances met testing criteria (at 50kΩ or below), lights were dimmed and the session began. A research assistant remained in the testing room to monitor participants' fixation and to call for breaks, as needed. The entire testing session took about 45 min.

2.1.3. Procedure
Participants were instructed to fixate on center of the fixation cross and to try not to move or blink during trials. Each trial con- sisted of ten 833 ms cycles, for a total duration of 8.33 s. Ten trials were recorded for each condition, and recording sessions typically lasted about 30 min. To minimize direction-selective adaptation, conditions were recorded in blocks, with each of the nine condi- tions being presented once per block, in random order. Participants were encouraged to rest or close their eyes between recording blocks. An experimenter remained in the recording chamber dur- ing recording to monitor the gaze of the participant throughout each trial to ensure that fixation was maintained. From this van- tage point, the experimenter could detect eye position changes from fixation in the range of 3–5°.


EEG Collection
A 128-channel HydroCel Geodesic Sensor Net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc.) was used in conjunction with NetStation 4.1 software to record SSVEP responses to the stimuli. EEG was sampled rate of 432.43 Hz, referenced to Cz, and the signal was low-pass filtered at 50 Hz [70] prior to analysis. Amplitude modulations that exceeded 60µV were rejected as artifact. Trials that had 15% of coherent/incoherent cycles rejected by these criteria were excluded from analysis. Children who produced fewer than three trials per condition were also excluded. A total of four children were excluded from analysis; two were excluded due to too few trials and two others were excluded due to equipment malfunction. In total, 29 children were included in the analysis (mean age=75.48 months; SD=19.18).

2.1.4. VEP recording and analysis
Steady-state evoked potential (SSVEP) responses were recorded via a 128-electrode dense array (SensorNet, Electrical Geodesics, Inc.). The electrodes were referenced to the vertex (Cz), and then re-referenced to the net average. EEG was sampled at a rate of 443.52 Hz and low pass filtered at 50 Hz. Electrode impedance for each session was at or below 50 kOhms for all electrodes. Arti- fact rejection parameters were employed to reject display cycles containing raw amplitudes that exceeded a threshold of 50 lV, as well as entire trials with 15% of rejected cycles. Activity was ana- lyzed offline via PowerDiva Host 3.4 software. The software ana- lyzes EEG patterns using a version of the discrete Fourier transform. Responses that occurred at integer harmonics of the modulation frequency (1.2 Hz, F1) of the displays and the monitor (24 Hz, F2) and were phase-locked to the stimulus are reported here. Topographic visualizations of the data were created with the effects of Pattern and Speed on the VEP signal. For Experiment 1, we report separate results for the 1F1 (modulation rate) and 1F2 (dot update rate) harmonics as well as the two intermodulation harmonics (1F1 􏰁 1F2 and 1F1 + 1F2). We had no prior basis for predictions about 2F1 results for optic flow patterns, and thus do not report those results. For Experiment 2, we report all of these harmonics plus the 2F1.
The 35 channels of interest (see Fig. 2) were from occipital and parieto-occipital regions, chosen to permit comparisons with pre- vious 5-channel SSVEP results (Gilmore et al., 2007; Hou et al., 2009) that measured activity at channels PO7, O1, Oz, O2, and PO8.
We report here the results of simple F-tests from illustrative channels. We chose an alpha level of 0.001 for our mass univariate analysis results to control for multiple comparisons. However, we occasionally mention effects that met less stringent criteria for sig- nificance to provide a fuller account of the data.

Analysis
PowerDiva Host 3.4 software was used offline to analyze the cortical activity related to the display of the stimuli. The software extracted frequency domain components at low order integer harmonics of the fundamental frequency (1F1=1.2 Hz) of the motion coherence modulation and the dot update rate (1F2=24 Hz) using a discrete Fourier transform algorithm. Data analysis focused on the phase-locked amplitude of responses at 1F1, 2F1, 3F1 and 1F2 [17, 62, 64, 70]. Phase-locked coherent averages of response amplitudes were analyzed and visualized using R 3.2 [71], RStudio 0.99.446 (http://www.rstudio.com), and the packages ggplot2 [72] and dplyr [73]. To reduce the likelihood of false positives, a conservative mass univariate approach [74] was utilized in which we analyzed speed and pattern effects separately for each individual channel while choosing a conservative criterion for determining statistical significance. To evaluate the overall responsiveness of EEG channels to motion coherence modulations, we calculated for each channel the T2Circ statistic [75], a version of Hotelling's T2 statistic adapted for frequency domain data, across participants, pattern types, and speeds. It is analogous to conducting a t test with the null hypothesis that EEG amplitudes are equal to zero. Since the T2Circ statistic could cause us to overlook channels that responded to the pattern and speed conditions with distinctive amplitude and phase profiles, we also computed a mixed-effects MANOVA (using R's manova command). Here, the real (cosine) and imaginary (sine) components of the Fourier decomposition of the EEG signal served as outcome variables. This revealed those EEG responses that were time/phase-locked to the stimulation modulations. We chose this approach in order to evaluate jointly amplitude and phase differences in the evoked responses while avoiding distributional complications with analyses based on amplitudes and phases. Specifically, amplitudes have a fixed floor at zero voltage, and phases are circularly distributed. Thus, both of these polar space quantities violate distributional assumptions that underlie standard linear statistical models. The real and imaginary components of the EEG are, under the null hypothesis, distributed symmetrically around zero, consistent with the distributional assumptions that underlie the general linear model.
 Consistent with standard mixed-effects modeling procedures in the behavioral sciences, participants' mean response levels were included in the model as random intercept effects to attempt to control for individual differences in EEG response magnitudes. We used the default Pillai trace test that approximates an F distribution as the statistic of interest. To interpret the results, we chose a statistical criterion of α=.0005. This compares to a Bonferroni adjustment with n=100 tests, assuming a baseline criterion of p<.05. We report partial η values to indicate effect sizes for the MANOVA results.  For illustrative purposes we plotted (Figs 3, 6, 7, 10, and 13-15) the channel-wise results over a range of strict and liberal levels of statistical significance to illustrate how the effects varied by choices of criterion. Additional figures, full datasets, and analysis code may be found at http://doi.org/10.17910/B7QG6W and https://github.com/gilmore-lab/gilmore-thomas-fesi-2015.
