
AUTHOR BLOCK: R. O. GILMORE, D. A. Fared, M. G. Dexheimer, A. R. Seisler; Penn State Univ., UNIVERSITY PK, PA  

Abstract:

Visual forms defined by motion contrast evoke distinctive brain responses in school-age children

Differential motion patterns aid in the segmentation of visual figures from the background. Adults show evoked brain responses to time-varying motion-defined forms over posterior scalp regions (Fesi et al., 2011; 2014). Responses to forms defined by direction differences between figure and background and coherence differences appear similar in spatial distribution, suggesting that networks which process form from motion show a degree of cue invariance (Fesi et al., 2011; 2014). Little is known about the development of brain responses to motion-defined forms, however. In this study, we measured steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) responses from n=37 children (mean age: 6.4 years; 16 female) to random dot kinematogram displays that depicted two types of motion defined form -- one defined by direction differences (5, 45, and 180 deg) between figure and background, and the other defined by coherence differences (0 vs. 100%).  Four 9x9 deg square-shaped figure regions emerged and disappeared from the background at a rate of 1.2 Hz (F1). Figure and background regions were populated with white (x cd/m^2) dots on a black (.7 cd/m^2) at a density of 10%; and dot positions were updated at 36 Hz (F2). Each condition was presented at two speeds (1.2 and 6.0 deg/s). EEG was collected at X Hz using a 128 channel EGI system and PowerDiva 3.X software. EEG data were submitted to a discrete Fourier transform. This report focuses on responses at two low order harmonics (1F1 and 2F1) of the stimulus modulation frequency. The complex domain (real and imaginary) components for each channel across participants were analyzed using mixed effects MANOVA, with direction difference and speed as fixed and participant as random factors. Channels meeting the p<.0005 alpha threshold for direction differences at 1F1 showed a broad distribution across the scalp. Further analyses revealed that only some channels showed the scaling of amplitude by direction difference (5 < 45 < 180 deg) found in adults. There were no effects of speed on 1F1, and no channels showing a direction by speed interaction. These results show that evoked visual responses to motion-defined forms show complex and diverse dynamics that may engage a widespread network of brain regions, similar but not identical to adults.
